The following is an interview between Elmer
Sparks, Texas ranchman and historian,
with Charlie Smith, old-time slave of Bartow,
Florida.
We've already got on the introduction on it. Okay.
Is it turning? Yes. Mitch Smith, what is your full
name? Charlie Smith. Charlie Smith. The man who
raised me named me Charlie Smith. My first name,
the first name that my mother named me is Mitchell.
Mitchell Watkins. That's what my mother and
father named me. Mitchell Watkins. I was raised in
that. I was born in Africa and come from the United
States. You see, that was in slavery time. They
sold the colored people. They sold the colored
people. And they bring them up from Africa. And
they brought me from Africa. I was a child, a boy.
The colored folks wanted to throw me off. The boat
coming from Africa. Throw them overboard. I'd get
cut. Throw them overboard. Let the damn whale
swallow him like it done Jonah. Hadn't it been that
the colored one wanted to throw me off. Hadn't it
been for the lay green, and the captain of the boat,
the lay green was a white man, and the captain of the
boat was a white man. But the colored one wanted to
throw me off the boat. And David Jack, when they
bring him from Africa, Liberia, Africa, where I
was born, and put in the United States, but the
northern people Bought colored folks. Put you up
on a block and said, big job. The highest it better
get you. The highest it better get you. The
northern people bought colored folks. And the
south bought colored folks. And the northern
people didn't care at all. Colored people. Till
the north said it's too cold. For them, you know, to
stand the cold. But they've got several white
folks. They've got several white folks that look
at them, and they pay the white folks, several
white folks, to look at them. And they've got to
mistreat
them. And they come down the north and the south,
the first part of the wall, the three of the colors,
the north and south part of the wall. And that is the
slavery time. And freedom... And he said, I ain't
reading for you because I couldn't read. I knew
something had to be done. And the man, he put you up
on the block to sell you, to bid you all. And then he
come down here in freedom, he bought the whole
state of Louisiana and gave it to the club people
for their territory. And they did all the rules. He
said, And the colored people sold their rights.
Sold out to the white. Sold to the white. And that's
freedom. There's no freedom in the north and
south, far from water. First of all, we're living
in the United States. North and south, far from
water. The free, the colored people don't stay
every time. I was reading for it, because I
couldn't read it. I knew it, because I was in the
crew. The crew. The colored people always did hate
me from a child bringing me from Africa. The
colored wanted to throw me off the boat. Throw me
overboard. Curse. Throw me overboard. Let me
curse. Let me die. How did you come to be on the
block, get out, and brought over here? Was you
brought over by surprise? Well, they brought me
over here. The North, they sold the colored
people. And they tricked you to get you on the boat.
And they what? They fooled you on the boat. They
fooled the colored people on the boat. I asked my
mama, could I go down to the boat landing to see that
white man? I was raised in Africa. That was in
Africa. I was raised one day in Africa with white
folks. Didn't know white people stay in Africa,
south part of Africa. They stayed in the north part
of Africa. And they were the solely colored people
in the south part of Africa. They put you up on a
block and did you all. And the way they got us on the
boat, he said, come back in here. That was the city.
Come in young, cooler than you, all the cooler.
Over in that country, you don't have to wait. If you
get hungry, all you got to do is go to the flutter
tree. Had the flutter tree on the boat, clean, got
the flutter tree. You go to the flutter tree. Same
thing that people call, you know, they call them
pancakes, they call them flippers. Them flipper
trees, bad that. That tree's bad, the flippers are
clean. Here's a flipper tree. It's on the boat. He
got on it. There's a flipper tree on the boat. Come
on down here. Call the Lord Nick on the, call the
flipper tree, then show us the syrup tree. Here's a
syrup tree. Oh, it is on the boat, too. Come on down
here. And they call it on the lower deck on the boat,
they keep calling it the hatch hole. Come on down
here in that hatch hole to show something down
there. Got out of the hatch hole, we said, well, the
boat's moving. Well, we thought it was going back
up there to the flutter tree. And it's leaving. And
when it landed, it landed, and he won't leave. The
colored people were so red. So the dangling men of
South Africa over here, the colored folks won the
story all. So I'm on the boat. I'm on the boat. And
the white, what is it? Don't you throw that boy up
there. Put him on the boat, got down, let the damn
whale swallow him like a dumb Jonah, that's what
they said. Don't throw me off the boat. Made me from
Africa and the United States. Got us over here to
slave them. Just put you on the block to slave them.
Put you up on the stage, because the court is a
block. Put you up on the stage. Just a matter of
body. The highest bill will get you. Get on it. The
highest bill will get you. He'll carry his
plantation. Put another one up there. The highest
bridge we've ever been to. He was the most, he came
to his plans. He had the white in the south. And they
went to mistreatin' him, the colored. Gettin'
shown by the colored women. You know, all the
cities there. Gettin' colored. And the white find
it out, how they was treatin' him, they didn't do
anything. And you come down here, the First World
War, over in the United States, this is north and
south, throughout the world, the free, the
colored. Who was it that bought you? Do you
remember who bought you? Bought me? Yeah. Oh, I was
with them. Went to New Orleans. That's where they
sold the people. The man raised me. He didn't buy
me. The man raised me. They were trying to put you up
on the block to sell you. He was Jake. The man was
Jake. He named me. That's the name I'm going now.
Charlie Smith. He named me when he took me. He
raised me in Texas, Galveston, Texas, where I was
raised in. And the man that raised me named Charlie
Smith, and that's the name he gave me. He gave me
Charlie Smith. He always teach me. And his
children, he treated me just like he treated his
children. And everything, not one thing,
everything. And we ate together, we slept
together. Oh, the boys now, we can sleep in little
women now. He was born, he lived together. He was a
cattle man, Charlie Smith. He had all kind of
cattle. And all of us tore his pistols and sent him
to shoot. And I was on this colored cowboy. I got on a
cowboy shirt and I brought him to Texas. Ben had it
all my days. I'd raise up a cowboy. I was the only
cowboy, full of cowboys he had within Texas. His
name was Charlie Smith, and he always teach me and
his children, anything you got to have, don't
never let it give out. And saying, enjoy your
money. When you're living, you can't get none of
the reason when you're dead. He said,
millionaires die when they leave all their cars
behind. Everything they got, they ain't had
nothing with
them. His name was Charlie Smith, and he named me
Charlie Smith. And he always told me, don't say my
name. And when he died, he had three or four of them.
He didn't put no money in no bank. He had these
little money safes. People got them now in some
places. In the houses, you know. He had two in his
drug store, in his dry goods store, and two in his
grocery store. That made four. That's where he
kept his money and all his cowboy money. What we
didn't take. We, all cowboys, wore boots. Half a
leg boots and knee, what you call knee boots, that
come clean to your knee. Well, we pulled it out over
here. He said to us, we pulled it out of boots. And I
was the only colored cowboy he had. All the rest of
them was white. We pulled pistols.
paddlers and things like that. When he got stuck,
he was a cattle man. He worked for the cattle. And
all the animals, bells, paddlers, and things like
that, and rams. He got to deal with pigs and those
young stuff. That's what we used to do. Cowboys
came to pistol and rifle to kill them. Now, what did
you do after the slaves were freed? After you was
with him? with him. Well, you just wonder how
they're working, huh? Well, you know, when they
freed the color, you just see, the man would, when
they freed the color, they bought the whole state
of Louisiana and gave the color people their
territory to make their laws and rules. And the
color people sold the rights. All they had to do was
get up in the woods and property anything, You have
to get them through butter white. Now, that's the
way to do it. You ain't got no, can't make no laws,
can't make no rules. If they make them white, let
them have them sold out. Now, after he died, then
where did you go then? After who died? After this
Charlie Smith. He ain't dead. Well, I mean, the one
that... Oh, he did, all right, but where he went, I
went and he sold the colored folks. After he sold
the colored people. After the slavery time, he
sold the colored folks. And then the first war was
in the north and the south spot war. The north
bought colored people. And the South bought
colored folks. And the North got the Southern
white folks to look after them and take care of
them. The little Cam North said it was too cold for
them and got the Southern white folks to look after
them. And the Southern white folks went to
mistreat them. Did you go out West then? No, I
wasn't in the West. I wasn't in the West then, yeah.
I was in the West when they freed them. That's what I
mean, after they freed them. Yeah, after they
freed them, I was in the West. Charlie, when he went
to selling them, he rejected selling me. Put you up
on the block. He rejected. Because he ruled that
part of Texas. He was a cattle man. And he ruled that
part of John Ruston. He ruled that part. And what he
said, he went. And when he said he wanted to sell me,
put me on the block, he rejected. And he didn't do
it. And he raised me, came to his house, and he
raised me. He named me Charlie. His name was
Charlie, and he named me Charlie. His name was
Charlie Smith. That's the name he gave me. That's
my name, what my mother and father named me. My
name, Mitchell. Mitchell Watkins. But he stole
me, and he got me. And he named me Charlie. That's
the name I grew in. And when he died, He died. And
when he died, he always teach me and his children.
Didn't teach us one thing, he teach us all. He said,
anything you got to have, don't never let it rip
out. You know what I'm saying? Enjoy your money
when you're living. Because you can't take none of
it with you when you're dead. Enjoy your money when
you're living. He teach us that all the time. And I
didn't go to school. But I thought I hadn't been
used to taking those pistols and nothing to shoot
with. And I was so full of more pistols and rifles I
had to carry. And I didn't do anything else. But I
was on this color boy. All these cowboys were
white. We all ate together. We slept together.
Everything. There was no difference in the
treatment at all. None. None. Did you move up to
Mississippi? Didn't you move to Mississippi? Oh,
I've been all over. You worked in Mississippi,
didn't you? I'm a state man, mister. I worked for
the United States. I worked with bad people. I'm a
state man. I'm a state man. I'm the man who made the
kid man and got the man to kill the president. And
the state named me. I got three names. The United
States, I went for the United States now. They
named me Trigger Kid. Me and Billy the Kid went and
got the man, killed the president. Went and got
him. Had a $500 reward in the boat to go give him. He
killed the president. Get talk, killed Garfield.
Garfield was the first president that was killed
with the United States. And the man killed him
named Gittor, and he went back over to his state,
where he'd come from. And it was Charles Gittor,
wasn't it? And they just put out $500 for water, and
everybody would go get him. There was six men right
at the line of the states. You had to get stories
from them to go over there. Everybody would go over
there to get him for $500. Them men would kill him.
Kill him. Six men. They kill you. If you go over
there and get that man, the man done to kill him, he
went back in that state, because that's the state
he was born and raised in. And there's six men right
in the line of the United States. And you had to get
started from them to go in the foot in that state.
And we, me and Billy the Kid, the son of, the United
States, named me Trevor Kid, but that's the name I
gave him. It's running.
It's running.
You picked some fruit, didn't you? You've done
quite a lot of fruit picking. Oh, I've done all
kinds. Here, right here. Here.
Here's my picture. Me and this man, that's my
picture. And that's my age. And it's a stroke.
That's a white man. Me and him were the two oldest
people in the world at that time. I was standing at
the town of Coalman, you know, right there.
Mm-hmm. I was picking fruit in the United States.
They told me you were picking fruit when you were
113. Is that right? Oh, right. Don't you see?
That's it. That's it. If I tell them that, they
don't hear me. That's really a mistake. It's a
print. It's something to me to show people. In the
United States. I'm going to work for the United
States now. I'm a state man. I'd wait for the United
States. I'd go get bad people, white or black,
don't care how old, who he is. If I got, if we do the
wrong thing, I'd go on a United States marriage as
long as I live. Were you interviewed by Robert
Ripley? You remember that Robert Ripley? Robert
Ripley, he's right there, that's living or not.
Well, I remember old, old bad people. White or
black. This Ripley's the man you're pictured with
there, Charlie. Yeah, that's it. Actually,
that's the reason I had to kill him. I showed it to
people. Me and this man was the two oldest people in
the world and required us to meet. That's a white
man. In the state named me Trevor Kidd. Me and Billy
Kidd went and got the man to kill the president.
Guitar killed Garfield. Garfield was the
president of the United States. He killed him. Get
tall. Kill Garfield. And everybody go over there
to get him, put him $500, they'd kill him. There
were six men right at the line of the states. And
everybody go over there to get the man, kill the
president. That's what state he was raised in, the
man down to kill him. He'd go back in that state.
That's the state he was born and raised in. Do you
remember what state that was, Charlie? What? The
state where this Garfield went back in, guitar.
Yeah, I don't know. I don't remember. I've got it
now. But I know he went back in the state. Yeah,
yeah. He went back in the state he was born and
raised in. And when he got to kill the man, he went
back in that state. Well, there's 60 men at the
line, or both at the moment. 60 men. Everybody goes
there to get him. After his name was done, they kill
him. Gittar killed Garfield. Garfield was the
first president that was killed in the United
States. And Gittar killed him and went back in that
state where he was born and raised in. And
everybody went there to get him. Them six men that
had the line, they did kill them. And they killed
them. And they shot me and Billy the Kid. The state
named me Trigger Kid, and Billy Kid, that was a
white man. When I went over there, it was red up
there, and they said, hey, where are you going?
There were them 60 men. Told them 60 men was hooking
bulls. You had to get sorted from them to go in
across in that state. Where are you going? Going
across the desert. All right, you get sorted from
us. You got sorted? Said, we cussed. Said, we got
sorted. We got soldiers from the United States,
showed them this, this, this. And here I was, here I
was, got me. He said, here I was, got down soldiers.
That's what he told them, them 60 men. He told them,
60 men, hooking moves. He said, right on, all
right, go ahead. He said, we damn sure going. Right
on off. Got you to camp. We was gone. Soldiers were
on a search. them to guard what was there. You all
come by the hooking bulls? We cussed. So we come by
some down bull or another. Well, you got started
from the hooking bull to search. The boss of the
camp ain't here. The boss of the camp ain't here. He
said, if you want to search, The voice in the
campaign, you know, the God was there. The God was
there. Well, coming back to the modern day or
later, did the Social Security people, did they
come see you? The Social Security? Yeah. Yeah. You
remember how old you were then? Yeah. The man who
raised me, yeah, the man who raised me, the man who
raised me, gave me the name I got, Charlie Smith. I
was raised in Galveston, Texas. But I mean later,
later. Were you about 113 when the Social Security
people come and say... Well, I don't show it to you.
That's what I'm saying. I don't show it to you. And
you're not... Keep on asking them questions. I
show it to you. I show it to you. My age... I'm older
now than I was then. I'm older now. I'm 144. Last
year, 4th of July. 144 years old now. My birthday,
I'll get the birthday card on my 144th, last
Thursday of July, last year. On my 144th. And you
don't wear glasses, you know? No, I ain't never
worn none. And you don't wear a hearing aid, is that
it? I got hearing, I hear, there's a good night over
here. I see good as hell. The United States takes
care of me. The United States. If I, if they stand me
there at you, or read out on the ditch, I don't see
you. I'm demanding straightened up walk shooter.
There's something in there. A couple of people
didn't come to stay there. If you could go uptown
with a heavy standing walk shooter, I'd
straighten it up. The state's something in there
to straighten it. Now there's a couple of people on
the property there. Right through here in the walk
shooter. The colored porter couldn't get off the
train then. White folks didn't allow them to get
off the train. The colored porter on the train
couldn't get off then. There stayed something
there. Straightened it up. I straightened it. The
colored porter couldn't get off then. And I
colored people on the property and walked you up. I
had to go to your officer. Sign was painted up
there. I said, that's for you. Put the sign and say,
read, negate, and run. I wasn't going to sign it. It
states something in there. I said, go tear that
sign down. I said, if you need any help, let us know.
I went there. The sign was right up there. I said,
read, nigger, and run. He asked me, you got
thoughties? I said, yeah, I've got thoughties.
Present your thoughties. Hear my goddamn
thoughties and hear my help. He's 45. I tore it
down. At Oxford. I tore it down. Anywhere the
states tell me to go and do, I do this. Now. Ever
since I've been waiting for the United States.
I've been waiting for the United States a hundred
years. When I go over there. New Brown to the Mason
Lodge? Yeah. I was a mason. I've been pussing. The
time I got old enough, I was put in, the man raised
me, put me in the mason. I've been a mason a hundred
years. If I weren't a mason, I couldn't join you.
And any other man, get my age, any boy, white or
black, you can get too old to join the mason. You can
get too young to join. And when I got old enough, the
man put me in the mason. One man, Charlotte, he put
me in the mason. If I want one, I couldn't go. That's
in a ring, but it just sits. Dropped out of the
square and clumped. He dropped that out. Well, I'm
a mason. That was a ring. That was sitting between
that ring. He dropped out. I was in a mason 100
years. One man, Charlie, put me in the mason. I'm
the first colored man over a male mason in the
United States. If I wasn't wanting that one, not
only me, nobody got age. You can get too old to join
the Masons. And you can get too young to join the
Masons. If I wasn't now, now I couldn't be because I
was too old. And anybody my age, white or black, you
can't join the Masons at that age. I know it. I've
been a Mason 100 years. I know Masons. Speaking of
cowboys, we're both cowboys. We're right out
of... Oh, yeah, I'm the only color cowboy man
Charlie had. He had a pen of cowboys, but I was the
only one he had. He raised me. How many were there in
your family originally? Oh, my family? Yeah. Oh,
do I... Your mother... I didn't have but one
brother and two sisters. Three sisters, but the
baby sister. My two older sisters, one of them was
named, one of them, both of them were married
already, my oldest. My baby sister, she was a
little kid. She was the baby of all the children. I
had one brother. His name was Simon Wardington. My
name, what my mother said, his name was Mitchell
Wardington. The man who had the only name was
Charlie Smith. That's the white man who raised me
in Texas. Charlie Smith. And he treated me just
like he treated his children. And everything, we
ate together, slept together. And when he died,
people bragged on preachers. Say good and so on and
all that good. When he died, I gave him money to
preach, to pray on preachers. I gave them money to
treat them, because I wanted to talk to myself. All
the cowboys told us we were boots, and what money we
didn't. The old man Charlie didn't keep us. We kept
it ourselves, and I was boots. And I was the only
colored cowboy. And we all read together, and we
all ate together. Not one time, all the time. And I
treated you just like my wife. Did you? You worked
in Mississippi one time, did you? Yeah, I went
there with Will Wayne. When that picture there was
struck, I was standing right down the road there at
Coal Almond. When that picture was struck,
someone else stood there and would call the radar.
I wonder if we haven't about covered this, and
we'll take some pictures. And so, thank you, and we
will take some pictures here.